Java is one of the most popular and widely used programming languages.
Used to develop mobile apps, desktop apps, web apps, web servers, games, and enterprise-level systems.
Java was invented by James Gosling and Oracle currently owns it. JDK 23 is the latest version of Java.
Java's syntax is similar to C/C++.
Popular platforms like LinkedIn, Amazon, and Netflix rely on Java for their back-end architecture, showcasing its stability and scalability across different environments.
Popularity is so high that 3 Billion+ devices use Java across the world.

Java is known for its simplicity, robustness, and security features.
Java applications are compiled to byte code that can run on any Java Virtual Machine.
Java evolved over time, with Java 2 introducing multiple configurations tailored for different platforms, showcasing its versatility.
In 1997, Sun Microsystems aimed to formalize Java through the ISO standards body but eventually withdrew from the process.
Despite not formalizing through ISO, Sun Microsystems offered most Java implementations at no cost, earning revenue by licensing specialized products such as the Java Enterprise System.
A significant milestone in Java’s history occurred on November 13, 2006, when Sun Microsystems released a large portion of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) as free, open-source software.
By May 8, 2007, the core JVM code was fully available under open-source distribution terms.
Java was designed with core principles: simplicity, robustness, security, high performance, portability, multi-threading, and dynamic interpretation. These principles have made Java a preferred language for various applications, including mobile devices, internet programming, gaming, and e-business.
Today, Java continues to be a cornerstone of modern software development, widely used across industries and platforms.

Compiler converts source code to byte code and then the JVM executes the bytecode generated by the compiler. This byte code can run on any platform be it Windows, Linux, or macOS which means if we compile a program on Windows, then we can run it on Linux and vice versa. Each operating system has a different JVM, but the output produced by all the OS is the same after the execution of the byte code. That is why we call java a platform-independent language.

2. Object-Oriented Programming
Java is an object-oriented language, promoting the use of objects and classes. Organizing the program in the terms of a collection of objects is a way of object-oriented programming, each of which represents an instance of the class.

The four main concepts of Object-Oriented programming are:

Abstraction
Encapsulation
Inheritance
Polymorphism

3. Simplicity
Java’s syntax is simple and easy to learn, especially for those familiar with C or C++. It eliminates complex features like pointers and multiple inheritances, making it easier to write, debug, and maintain code.

4. Robustness
Java language is robust which means reliable. It is developed in such a way that it puts a lot of effort into checking errors as early as possible, that is why the java compiler is able to detect even those errors that are not easy to detect by another programming language. The main features of java that make it robust are garbage collection, exception handling, and memory allocation.

5. Security
In java, we don’t have pointers, so we cannot access out-of-bound arrays i.e it shows ArrayIndexOutOfBound Exception if we try to do so. That’s why several security flaws like stack corruption or buffer overflow are impossible to exploit in Java. Also, java programs run in an environment that is independent of the os(operating system) environment which makes java programs more secure.

6. Distributed
We can create distributed applications using the java programming language. Remote Method Invocation and Enterprise Java Beans are used for creating distributed applications in java. The java programs can be easily distributed on one or more systems that are connected to each other through an internet connection.

7. Multithreading
Java supports multithreading, enabling the concurrent execution of multiple parts of a program. This feature is particularly useful for applications that require high performance, such as games and real-time simulations.

8. Portability
As we know, java code written on one machine can be run on another machine. The platform-independent feature of java in which its platform-independent bytecode can be taken to any platform for execution makes java portable. WORA(Write Once Run Anywhere) makes java application to generates a ‘.class’ file that corresponds to our applications(program) but contains code in binary format. It provides ease t architecture-neutral ease as bytecode is not dependent on any machine architecture. It is the primary reason java is used in the enterprising IT industry globally worldwide.

9. High Performance
Java architecture is defined in such a way that it reduces overhead during the runtime and at some times java uses Just In Time (JIT) compiler where the compiler compiles code on-demand basis where it only compiles those methods that are called making applications to execute faster.

How Java Code Executes?
The execution of a Java application code involves three main steps:

1. Creating the Program
Java programs are written using a text editor or an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) like IntelliJ IDEA, Eclipse, or NetBeans. The source code is saved with a .java extension.

2. Compiling the Program
The Java compiler (javac) converts the source code into bytecode, which is stored in a .class file. This bytecode is platform-independent and can be executed on any machine with a JVM.

3. Running the Program
The JVM executes the compiled bytecode, translating it into machine code specific to the operating system and hardware.

Compile time error
Essential Java Terminologies You Need to Know
Before learning Java, one must be familiar with these common terms of Java.

1. Java Virtual Machine(JVM)
The JVM is an integral part of the Java platform, responsible for executing Java bytecode. It ensures that the output of Java programs is consistent across different platforms.

Writing a program is done by a java programmer like you and me.
The compilation is done by the JAVAC compiler which is a primary Java compiler included in the Java development kit (JDK). It takes the Java program as input and generates bytecode as output.
In the Running phase of a program, JVM executes the bytecode generated by the compiler.
The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) is designed to run the bytecode generated by the Java compiler. Each operating system has its own version of the JVM, but all JVMs follow the same rules and standards. This means Java programs can run the same way on any device with a JVM, regardless of the operating system. This is why Java is called a platform-independent language.

2. Bytecode
Bytecode is the intermediate representation of Java code, generated by the Java compiler. It is platform-independent and can be executed by the JVM.

3. Java Development Kit(JDK)
While we were using the term JDK when we learn about bytecode and JVM. So, as the name suggests, it is a complete Java development kit that includes everything including compiler, Java Runtime Environment (JRE), Java Debuggers, Java Docs, etc. For the program to execute in java, we need to install JDK on our computer in order to create, compile and run the java program.

4. Java Runtime Environment (JRE)
JDK includes JRE. JRE installation on our computers allows the java program to run, however, we cannot compile it. JRE includes a browser, JVM, applet support, and plugins. For running the java program, a computer needs JRE.

5. Garbage Collector
In Java, programmers can’t delete the objects. To delete or recollect that memory JVM has a program called Garbage Collector. Garbage Collectors can recollect the objects that are not referenced. So Java makes the life of a programmer easy by handling memory management. However, programmers should be careful about their code whether they are using objects that have been used for a long time. Because Garbage cannot recover the memory of objects being referenced.

6. ClassPath
The Classpath is the file path where the java runtime and Java compiler look for .class files to load. By default, JDK provides many libraries. If you want to include external libraries they should be added to the classpath.

Basically everything in java is represented in Class as an object including the main function.

Advantages of Java
Platform independent: Java code can run on any platform that has a Java Virtual Machine (JVM) installed, which means that applications can be written once and run on any device.
Object-Oriented: Java is an object-oriented programming language, which means that it follows the principles of encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism.
Security: Java has built-in security features that make it a secure platform for developing applications, such as automatic memory management and type checking.
Large community: Java has a large and active community of developers, which means that there is a lot of support available for learning and using the language.
Enterprise-level applications: Java is widely used for developing enterprise-level applications, such as web applications, e-commerce systems, and database systems.
Disadvantages of Java
Performance: Java can be slower compared to other programming languages, such as C++, due to its use of a virtual machine and automatic memory management.
Memory management: Java’s automatic memory management can lead to slower performance and increased memory usage, which can be a drawback for some applications.

Differences between JDK, JRE and JVM
Last Updated : 21 Jan, 2025
Understanding the difference between JDK, JRE, and JVM plays a very important role in understanding how Java works and how each component contributes to the development and execution of Java applications. The main difference between JDK, JRE, and JVM is:

JDK: Java Development Kit is a software development environment used for developing Java applications and applets.
JRE: JRE stands for Java Runtime Environment and it provides an environment to run only the Java program onto the system.
JVM: JVM stands for Java Virtual Machine and is responsible for executing the Java program.

JDK(Java Development Kit)
The JDK is a software development kit that provides the environment to develop and execute the java application. It includes two things:

Development Tools (to provide an environment to develop your java programs)
JRE (to execute your java program)
Working of JDK
The JDK enables the development and execution of Java programs. Consider the following process:

Java Source File (e.g., Example.java): You write the Java program error in a source file.
Compilation: The source file is compiled by the Java Compiler (part of JDK) into bytecode, which is stored in a .class file (e.g., Example.class).
Execution: The bytecode is executed by the JVM (Java Virtual Machine), which interprets the bytecode and runs the Java program.

Note: From above, media operation computing during the compile time can be interpreted.

The following actions occur at runtime as listed below:

Class Loader
Byte Code Verifier
Interpreter
Execute the Byte Code
Make appropriate calls to the underlying hardware
JRE((Java Runtime Environment)
The JRE is an installation package that provides an environment to only run(not develop) the Java program (or application) onto your machine. JRE is only used by those who only want to run Java programs that are end-users of your system.

Working of JRE
When you run a Java program, the following steps occur:

Class Loader: The JRE’s class loader loads the .class file containing the bytecode into memory.
Bytecode Verifier: The bytecode verifier checks the bytecode for security and correctness.
Interpreter: The JVM interprets the bytecode and executes the program.
Execution: The program executes, making calls to the underlying hardware and system resources as needed.
JVM (Java Virtual Machine)
The JVM is a very important part of both JDK and JRE because it is contained or inbuilt in both. Whatever Java program you run using JRE or JDK goes into JVM and JVM is responsible for executing the java program line by line, hence it is also known as an interpreter.

Working of JVM
It is mainly responsible for three activities.

Loading
Linking
Initialization

Note: From above, media operation computing during the compile time can be interpreted.

The following actions occur at runtime as listed below:

Class Loader
Byte Code Verifier
Interpreter
Execute the Byte Code
Make appropriate calls to the underlying hardware
JRE((Java Runtime Environment)
The JRE is an installation package that provides an environment to only run(not develop) the Java program (or application) onto your machine. JRE is only used by those who only want to run Java programs that are end-users of your system.

Working of JRE
When you run a Java program, the following steps occur:

Class Loader: The JRE’s class loader loads the .class file containing the bytecode into memory.
Bytecode Verifier: The bytecode verifier checks the bytecode for security and correctness.
Interpreter: The JVM interprets the bytecode and executes the program.
Execution: The program executes, making calls to the underlying hardware and system resources as needed.
JVM (Java Virtual Machine)
The JVM is a very important part of both JDK and JRE because it is contained or inbuilt in both. Whatever Java program you run using JRE or JDK goes into JVM and JVM is responsible for executing the java program line by line, hence it is also known as an interpreter.

Working of JVM
It is mainly responsible for three activities.

Loading
Linking
Initialization


Java Keywords
In  ava, Keywords are the Resered words in a programming language that are used for some internal process or represent some predefined actions. These words are therefore not allowed to use as variable names or objects.

Keyword	Usage
abstract:-	Specifies that a class or method will be implemented later, in a subclass
assert:-	Assert describes a predicate placed in a Java program to indicate that the developer thinks that the predicate is always true at that place.
boolean:-	A data type that can hold True and False values only
break:-	A control statement for breaking out of loops.
byte:-	A data type that can hold 8-bit data values
case:-	Used in switch statements to mark blocks of text
catch:-	Catches exceptions generated by try statements
char:-	A data type that can hold unsigned 16-bit Unicode characters
class:-	Declares a new class
continue:-	Sends control back outside a loop
default:-	Specifies the default block of code in a switch statement
do:-	Starts a do-while loop
double:-	A data type that can hold 64-bit floating-point numbers
else:-	Indicates alternative branches in an if statement
enum:-	A Java keyword is used to declare an enumerated type. Enumerations extend the base class.
extends:-	Indicates that a class is derived from another class or interface
final:-	Indicates that a variable holds a constant value or that a method will not be overridden
finally:-	Indicates a block of code in a try-catch structure that will always be executed
float:-	A data type that holds a 32-bit floating-point number
for:-	Used to start a for loop
if:-	Tests a true/false expression and branches accordingly
implements:-	Specifies that a class implements an interface
import:-	References other classes
instanceof:-	Indicates whether an object is an instance of a specific class or implements an interface
int:-	A data type that can hold a 32-bit signed integer
interface:-	Declares an interface
long:-	A data type that holds a 64-bit integer
native:-	Specifies that a method is implemented with native (platform-specific) code
new:-	Creates new objects
null:-	This indicates that a reference does not refer to anything
package:-	Declares a Java package
private:-	An access specifier indicating that a method or variable may be accessed only in the class it’s declared in
protected:-	An access specifier indicating that a method or variable may only be accessed in the class it’s declared in (or a subclass of the class it’s declared in or other classes in the same package)
public:-	An access specifier used for classes, interfaces, methods, and variables indicating that an item is accessible throughout the application (or where the class that defines it is accessible)
return:-	Sends control and possibly a return value back from a called method
short:-	A data type that can hold a 16-bit integer
static:-	Indicates that a variable or method is a class method (rather than being limited to one particular object)
strictfp:-	A Java keyword is used to restrict the precision and rounding of floating-point calculations to ensure portability.
super:-	Refers to a class’s base class (used in a method or class constructor)
switch:-	A statement that executes code based on a test value
synchronized:-	Specifies critical sections or methods in multithreaded code
this:-	Refers to the current object in a method or constructor
throw:-	Creates an exception
throws:-	Indicates what exceptions may be thrown by a method
transient:-	Specifies that a variable is not part of an object’s persistent state
try:-	Starts a block of code that will be tested for exceptions
void:-	Specifies that a method does not have a return value
volatile:-	This indicates that a variable may change asynchronously
while:-	Starts a while loop
sealed:- The sealed keyword is used to declare a class as “sealed,” meaning it restricts which classes can extend it.
permits:-The permits keyword is used within a sealed class declaration to specify the subclasses that are permitted to extend it.

mportant Points:
The keywords const and goto are reserved, even though they are not currently in use.
Currently, they are no longer supported in Java.
true, false, and null look like keywords, but in actuality they are literals. However, they still can’t be used as identifiers in a program.

Java is statically typed and also a strongly typed language because, in Java, each type of data (such as integer, character, hexadecimal, packed decimal, and so forth) is predefined as part of the programming language and all constants or variables defined for a given program must be described with one of the Java data types.

Data types:- in Java are of different sizes and values that can be stored in the variable that is made as per convenience and circumstances to cover up all test cases. Java has two categories in which data types are segregated

Primitive Data Type: such as boolean, char, int, short, byte, long, float, and double. The Boolean with uppercase B is a wrapper class for the primitive data type boolean in Java.

Non-Primitive Data Type or Object Data type: such as String, Array, etc.

Primitive Data Types
1. boolean Data Type
The boolean data type represents a logical value that can be either true or false error. Conceptually, it represents a single bit of information, but the actual size used by the virtual machine is implementation-dependent and typically at least one byte (eight bits) in practice. Values of the boolean type are not implicitly or explicitly converted to any other type using casts. However, programmers can write conversion code if needed.

Syntax:

boolean booleanVar;
Size : Virtual machine dependent (typically 1 byte, 8 bits)

2. byte Data Type
The byte data type is an 8-bit signed two’s complement integer. The byte data type is useful for saving memory in large arrays.

Syntax:

byte byteVar;
Size : 1 byte (8 bits)

3. short Data Type
The short data type is a 16-bit signed two’s complement integer. Similar to byte, a short is used when memory savings matter, especially in large arrays where space is constrained.

Syntax:

short shortVar;
Size : 2 bytes (16 bits)

4. int Data Type
It is a 32-bit signed two’s complement integer.

Syntax:

int intVar;
Size : 4 bytes ( 32 bits )

 Remember:  In Java SE 8 and later, we can use the int data type to represent an unsigned 32-bit integer, which has a value in the range [0, 2  32  -1]. Use the Integer class to use the int data type as an unsigned integer.


5. long Data Type
The long data type is a 64-bit signed two’s complement integer. It is used when an int is not large enough to hold a value, offering a much broader range.

Syntax:

long longVar;
Size : 8 bytes (64 bits)

 Remember:  In Java SE 8 and later, you can use the long data type to represent an unsigned 64-bit long, which has a minimum value of 0 and a maximum value of 2  64  -1. The Long class also contains methods like comparing Unsigned, divide Unsigned, etc to support arithmetic operations for unsigned long.


6. float Data Type
The float data type is a single-precision 32-bit IEEE 754 floating-point. Use a float (instead of double) if you need to save memory in large arrays of floating-point numbers. The size of the float data type is 4 bytes (32 bits).

Syntax:

float floatVar;
Size : 4 bytes (32 bits)

7. double Data Type
The double data type is a double-precision 64-bit IEEE 754 floating-point. For decimal values, this data type is generally the default choice. The size of the double data type is 8 bytes or 64 bits.

Syntax:

double doubleVar;
Size : 8 bytes (64 bits)

Note:  Both float and double data types were designed especially for scientific calculations, where approximation errors are acceptable. If accuracy is the most prior concern then, it is recommended not to use these data types and use BigDecimal class instead.

8. char Data Type
The char data type is a single 16-bit Unicode character with the size of 2 bytes (16 bits).

Syntax:

char charVar;
Size : 2 bytes (16 bits)

Non-Primitive (Reference) Data Types
The Non-Primitive (Reference) Data Types will contain a memory address of variable values because the reference types won’t store the variable value directly in memory. They are strings, objects, arrays, etc.

1. Strings
Strings are defined as an array of characters. The difference between a character array and a string in Java is, that the string is designed to hold a sequence of characters in a single variable whereas, a character array is a collection of separate char-type entities. Unlike C/C++, Java strings are not terminated with a null character.

Syntax: Declaring a string

<String_Type> <string_variable> = “<sequence_of_string>”;
Example:

// Declare String without using new operator
String s = "GeeksforGeeks";
// Declare String using new operator
String s1 = new String("GeeksforGeeks");

2. Class
A Class is a user-defined blueprint or prototype from which objects are created.  It represents the set of properties or methods that are common to all objects of one type. In general, class declarations can include these components, in order:

Modifiers : A class can be public or has default access. Refer to access specifiers for classes or interfaces in Java
Class name: The name should begin with an initial letter (capitalized by convention).
Superclass(if any): The name of the class’s parent (superclass), if any, preceded by the keyword extends. A class can only extend (subclass) one parent.
Interfaces(if any): A comma-separated list of interfaces implemented by the class, if any, preceded by the keyword implements. A class can implement more than one interface.
Body: The class body is surrounded by braces, { }.

3. Object
An Object is a basic unit of Object-Oriented Programming and represents real-life entities.  A typical Java program creates many objects, which as you know, interact by invoking methods. An object consists of :

State : It is represented by the attributes of an object. It also reflects the properties of an object.
Behavior : It is represented by the methods of an object. It also reflects the response of an object to other objects.
Identity : It gives a unique name to an object and enables one object to interact with other objects.

4. Interface
Like a class, an interface can have methods and variables, but the methods declared in an interface are by default abstract (only method signature, no body).

Interfaces specify what a class must do and not how. It is the blueprint of the class.
An Interface is about capabilities like a Player may be an interface and any class implementing Player must be able to (or must implement) move(). So it specifies a set of methods that the class has to implement.
If a class implements an interface and does not provide method bodies for all functions specified in the interface, then the class must be declared abstract.
A Java library example is Comparator Interface . If a class implements this interface, then it can be used to sort a collection.

5. Array
An Array is a group of like-typed variables that are referred to by a common name. Arrays in Java work differently than they do in C/C++. The following are some important points about Java arrays.

In Java, all arrays are dynamically allocated. (discussed below)
Since arrays are objects in Java, we can find their length using member length. This is different from C/C++ where we find length using size.
A Java array variable can also be declared like other variables with [] after the data type.
The variables in the array are ordered and each has an index beginning with 0.
Java array can also be used as a static field, a local variable, or a method parameter.
The size of an array must be specified by an int value and not long or short.
The direct superclass of an array type is Object.
Every array type implements the interfaces Cloneable and java.io.Serializable.

Key Points to Remember
Strong Typing: Java enforces strict type checking at compile-time, reducing runtime errors.
Memory Efficiency: Choosing the right data type based on the range and precision needed helps in efficient memory management.
Immutability of Strings: Strings in Java cannot be changed once created, ensuring safety in multithreaded environments.
Array Length: The length of arrays in Java is fixed once declared, and it can be accessed using the length attribute

Variables:- are the containers for storing the data values or you can also call it a memory location name for the data. Every variable has a:

Data Type – The kind of data that it can hold. For example, int, string, float, char, etc.
Variable Name – To identify the variable uniquely within the scope.
Value – The data assigned to the variable.
There are three types of variables in Java – Local, Instance, and Static.

Types of Java Variables
Now let us discuss different types of variables  which are listed as follows:

Local Variables
Instance Variables
Static Variables

Let us discuss the traits of every type of variable listed here in detail.

1. Local Variables
A variable defined within a block or method or constructor is called a local variable.

The Local variable is created at the time of declaration and destroyed after exiting from the block or when the call returns from the function.
The scope of these variables exists only within the block in which the variables are declared, i.e., we can access these variables only within that block.
Initialization of the local variable is mandatory before using it in the defined scope.

2. Instance Variables
Instance variables are non-static variables and are declared in a class outside of any method, constructor, or block.

As instance variables are declared in a class, these variables are created when an object of the class is created and destroyed when the object is destroyed.
Unlike local variables, we may use access specifiers for instance variables. If we do not specify any access specifier, then the default access specifier will be used.
Initialization of an instance variable is not mandatory. Its default value is dependent on the data type of variable. For String it is null, for float it is 0.0f, for int it is 0, for Wrapper classes like Integer it is null, etc.
Scope of instance variables are throughout the class except the static contexts.
Instance variables can be accessed only by creating objects.
We initialize instance variables using constructors while creating an object. We can also use instance blocks to initialize the instance variables.

3. Static Variables
Static variables are also known as class variables.

These variables are declared similarly to instance variables. The difference is that static variables are declared using the static keyword within a class outside of any method, constructor, or block.
Unlike instance variables, we can only have one copy of a static variable per class, irrespective of how many objects we create.
Static variables are created at the start of program execution and destroyed automatically when execution ends.
Initialization of a static variable is not mandatory. Its default value is dependent on the data type of variable. For String it is null, for float it is 0.0f, for int it is 0, for Wrapper classes like Integer it is null, etc.
If we access a static variable like an instance variable (through an object), the compiler will show a warning message, which won’t halt the program. The compiler will replace the object name with the class name automatically.
If we access a static variable without the class name, the compiler will automatically append the class name. But for accessing the static variable of a different class, we must mention the class name as 2 different classes might have a static variable with the same name.
Static variables cannot be declared locally inside an instance method.
Static blocks can be used to initialize static variables.

Instance Variables vs Static Variables
Now let us discuss the differences between the Instance variables and the Static variables:

Each object will have its own copy of an instance variable, whereas we can only have one copy of a static variable per class, irrespective of how many objects we create. Thus, static variables are good for memory management.
Changes made in an instance variable using one object will not be reflected in other objects as each object has its own copy of the instance variable. In the case of a static variable, changes will be reflected in other objects as static variables are common to all objects of a class.
We can access instance variables through object references, and static variables can be accessed directly using the class name.
Instance variables are created when an object is created with the use of the keyword ‘new’ and destroyed when the object is destroyed. Static variables are created when the program starts and destroyed when the program stops.

Java Operators
Java operators are special symbols that perform operations on variables or values. They can be classified into several categories based on their functionality. These operators play a crucial role in performing arithmetic, logical, relational, and bitwise operations etc.
The Sum is: 600
The Difference is: 400

Types of Operators in Java
Arithmetic Operators
Unary Operators
Assignment Operator
Relational Operators
Logical Operators
Ternary Operator
Bitwise Operators
Shift Operators
instance of operator

1. Arithmetic Operators
Arithmetic Operators are used to perform simple arithmetic operations on primitive and non-primitive data types.

* : Multiplication
/ : Division
% : Modulo
+ : Addition
– : Subtraction

Unary Operators:-
Unary Operators need only one operand. They are used to increment, decrement, or negate a value.

- , Negates the value.
+ , Indicates a positive value (automatically converts byte, char, or short to int).
++ , Increments by 1.
Post-Increment: Uses value first, then increments.
Pre-Increment: Increments first, then uses value.
-- , Decrements by 1.
Post-Decrement: Uses value first, then decrements.
Pre-Decrement: Decrements first, then uses value.
! , Inverts a boolean value.

3. Assignment Operator
 ‘=’ Assignment operator is used to assign a value to any variable. It has right-to-left associativity, i.e. value given on the right-hand side of the operator is assigned to the variable on the left, and therefore right-hand side value must be declared before using it or should be a constant.

The general format of the assignment operator is:

variable = value;


In many cases, the assignment operator can be combined with others to create shorthand compound statements. For example, a += 5 replaces a = a + 5. Common compound operators include:

+= , Add and assign.
-= , Subtract and assign.
*= , Multiply and assign.
/= , Divide and assign.
%= , Modulo and assign.

4. Relational Operators
Relational Operators are used to check for relations like equality, greater than, and less than. They return boolean results after the comparison and are extensively used in looping statements as well as conditional if-else statements. The general format is ,

variable relation_operator value


Relational operators compare values and return boolean results:

== , Equal to.
!= , Not equal to.
< , Less than.
<= , Less than or equal to.
> , Greater than.
>= , Greater than or equal to.

5. Logical Operators
Logical Operators are used to perform “logical AND” and “logical OR” operations, similar to AND gate and OR gate in digital electronics. They have a short-circuiting effect, meaning the second condition is not evaluated if the first is false.

Conditional operators are:

&&, Logical AND: returns true when both conditions are true.
||, Logical OR: returns true if at least one condition is true.
!, Logical NOT: returns true when a condition is false and vice-versa

6. Ternary operator
The Ternary Operator is a shorthand version of the if-else statement. It has three operands and hence the name Ternary. The general format is ,

condition ? if true : if false


The above statement means that if the condition evaluates to true, then execute the statements after the ‘?’ else execute the statements after the ‘:’.

7. Bitwise Operators
Bitwise Operators are used to perform the manipulation of individual bits of a number and with any of the integer types. They are used when performing update and query operations of the Binary indexed trees.

& (Bitwise AND) – returns bit-by-bit AND of input values.
| (Bitwise OR) – returns bit-by-bit OR of input values.
^ (Bitwise XOR) – returns bit-by-bit XOR of input values.
~ (Bitwise Complement) – inverts all bits (one’s complement).

8. Shift Operators
Shift Operators are used to shift the bits of a number left or right, thereby multiplying or dividing the number by two, respectively. They can be used when we have to multiply or divide a number by two. The general format ,

 number shift_op number_of_places_to_shift;


<< (Left shift) – Shifts bits left, filling 0s (multiplies by a power of two).
>> (Signed right shift) – Shifts bits right, filling 0s (divides by a power of two), with the leftmost bit depending on the sign.
>>> (Unsigned right shift) – Shifts bits right, filling 0s, with the leftmost bit always 0.

9. instanceof operator
The instance of operator is used for type checking. It can be used to test if an object is an instance of a class, a subclass, or an interface. The general format ,

object instance of class/subclass/interface

Precedence and Associativity of Java Operators
Precedence and associative rules are used when dealing with hybrid equations involving more than one type of operator.
In such cases, these rules determine which part of the equation to consider first, as there can be many different valuations for the same equation.
The below table depicts the precedence of operators in decreasing order as magnitude, with the top representing the highest precedence and the bottom showing the lowest precedence.

1. Precedence and Associativity
There is often confusion when it comes to hybrid equations which are equations having multiple operators.
 The problem is which part to solve first. There is a golden rule to follow in these situations.
 If the operators have different precedence, solve the higher precedence first.
 If they have the same precedence, solve according to associativity, that is, either from right to left or from left to right.
 The explanation of the below program is well written in comments within the program itself.